When we were discussing
the if statement in Fortran
we wrote a small function
that returned true
if the argument was a leap
year; false, otherwise.
The function did the job.
But as we mentioned,
there's a lot more
to say about functions,
or more generally,
procedures in Fortran.
So let's dive in.
So this was the
code as we left it.
Just to re-emphasise,
the implicit none
is really required in
each compilation unit.
Although in this
particular case,
the function
is_leap_year is actually
part of the program
compilation unit
in which we had
an implicit none.
So still, you need to have
it in each compilation unit
to have its effect, to ensure
that each variable which
is used in that compilation unit
must be declared explicitly.
Now, let's modify our function
a little bit and explore a bit.
So let's add a single
statement to our function, just
an assignment to the
function argument.
We just assigned the value
1948 to the variable year In
the programme unit,
we call the function.
And afterwards,
we print the value
of the argument, which was
passed to the function.
So we just print
the value of year
after the function was called.
So when we compile and
run the application,
you might be in for a surprise.
Before the function call, the
value of the variable year
is 1899, and after the
function call, it's 1948.
So the assignment
in the function
has actually changed the
value of the variable which
was passed to that function
in the calling context.
Essentially by default,
variables in Fortran
are passed by reference to
procedures, to functions,
and to subroutines.
And that might
come as a surprise.
Fortran has some features to
deal with this kind of problem.
So for arguments
passed to procedures,
we can actually
declare the intent.
The intent can be in and that
implies that the argument
value is only used.
But it will not be
assigned a new value.
The intent might
also be inout which
means that we will use the
value passed in to the argument.
But it will also be modified.
And then also modified
in the calling context.
And finally, there's
also intent out.
And that means that
we are not going
to use the current value
of the argument passed
to the function, but
rather that we will
give that argument a value.
And that, of course, will be
the value in the calling context
after the procedure
has been called.
So in this particular
case the intent
is, of course, in,
because we want
to use the value of the
argument here in the function.
But we do not wish to modify it.
When we now compile
the application
you see that we
actually get an error.
And the error says
the dummy argument,
so the argument of the
procedure year, has intent in.
And actually it is
being assigned to,
and that, of
course, is an error.
So explicitly
declaring the intent
of arguments to procedures will
avoid a number of mistakes.
Because the compiler
will complain when
you do something
inappropriate with respect
to the intent of a
certain argument.
Let's remove the
accidental assignment
to the argument year.
And let's improve the error
handling a little bit.
So let's pass an
additional argument
to our function has_error.
And that is intended to be set
to true when an error occurred
and to false if not.
So that argument would, of
course, be of type logical
since it's a Boolean value.
And it is an optional argument.
So it may be present in
the function call or not.
And the intent is
out, because we really
don't care what value is
passed into the function.
We want to assign a value
in the function that
can be used in the calling
context, hence intent out.
But given that that is
an optional argument,
that means that we have to
check whether it was present
or not when the
function was called.
And this we can do using
the present function
it is an intrinsic function.
And if it's present,
then we set its value.
We set the value of has_error.
And depending on
whether the year
is less than or equal to 1582,
the year of the introduction
of the Gregorian calendar,
we set the Boolean value,
the logical value.
So in the programming
unit, we now have two calls
to the function is_leap_year,
the original one
with just a single argument,
the year, and the second one,
with the year as argument, but
with the optional argument,
has_error.
And so after the
call, we can check
whether has_error is true.
And in that case, we
can print a message.
Just a few details to discuss.
It's good practise when you
have an optional argument
to actually call it by name.
So basically has_error
would be the name
of that optional argument.
That really emphasises that
this is an optional argument.
So it's just good practise.
You don't need to
do that, but it
helps to make your code
easier to understand.
Another thing that
can be useful is
to change the function
signature just a little bit.
So we put the return type,
in this case logical,
in front of the
function keyword.
But then we had to assign a
return value of the function
to the function name,
which may be a bit awkward.
If you don't like that,
you can use result
with a variable name.
And then, of course,
you would have
to declare that variable, in
this case with type logical,
since that's the intent here.
And then, rather than assigning
to the name of the function
is_leap_year, we can
simply use is_leap
to hold the return
value of the function.
And that may make things
a little bit neater.
Of course, nothing
we did fundamentally
changed the implementation
of our function.
But it got a bit more
readable and, of course,
quite a bit more solid.
So basically, less opportunity
for bugs, so more solid code,
better quality.